As we just mentioned, the key elements of
an inertial measurement unit are sensors that
measure acceleration, magnetic field and angular
velocity. Now, we’re going to talk about
how we measure acceleration.
What I have in front of me here is what’s
called a quadrotor. It is a flying robot.
It’s got four propellers. And, by controlling
the speed of the individual propellers, I
can make the machine go up, down, left, right
and so on. Really critically important to
control a machine like this in the air is
a sense of balance knowing its orientation
in 3D space. So, it has an inertial measurement
unit on board. So, somewhere inside this large
stack of electronics, there is a board that
looks something like this. This board contains
three accelerometers, which allow it to determine
its roll and pitch angle in space. It contains
three gyroscopes which measure its rotational
velocity around three orthogonal axis. And,
it contains a three-axis magnetometer, so it
can determine its orientation where it’s
heading with respect to the Earth’s magnetic
field.
Now, this little board is customised for this
particular quadrotor. A commercial product
that performs exactly the same function is
a device like this. It's got a USB port that plugs
in to a computer, but internally, it contains
three accelerometers, three gyroscopes, and
three magnetometers. Now, this same functionality
exists in very compact form inside almost
all modern smartphones. And, this enables
the smartphone compass application so it can
find north, it can determine roll and pitch
angles. It’s sometimes used for game control and so on.
Imagine now that I’m standing in a lift
or an elevator, and I’ve got a very simple
dynamical model for my body. It consists
of a mass sitting on a spring. The mass represents
the mass of my body situated at a point at
my centre mass and it’s sitting on a spring
which represents the softness of my lower
body and my legs. Now, as the lift starts
to move upwards, we feel momentarily heavier,
that is the weight pushes down on the spring.
And, as the lift comes to a stop, we feel
momentarily lighter and this is because of
inertial effect. It means that it wants to
maintain its current velocity. So, when we
start off, it wants to maintain its original
0 velocity and that’s what causes it to
lag behind the person moving up in a lift.
And, that compresses the spring, it make them
feel heavier.
As the lift slows down, the weight wants to
keep going at the vertical velocity of the
lift and that causes that spring to extend
and causes us to feel a little bit lighter.
Here is a small modern inertial measurement
unit, the type that’s quite commonly used
in a variety of robot systems. Inside the
little box are a number of sensors including
accelerometers. So, let’s look inside the
box and see how an accelerometer works. And,
it looks just like the example we studied
before. It contains a mass and a spring. As
the body of the accelerometer accelerates
upwards, the weight extends the spring. And,
as the accelerometer decelerates, the spring
pulls the weight upwards. So, the extension
of the spring is linearly related to the acceleration
of the body of the accelerometer. This is
the fundamental principle underpinning all
acceleration sensing devices.
Let’s look inside the box and, once again,
we see a spring and a mass. The mass is often
referred to as the proof mass. And, in this
example, it’s got a mass of m and the extension
of the spring is denoted by the symbol x.
Now, I’m going to mark the center of mass
of the proof mass and its displacement with
respect to the ground, I’m going to denote it
by xm. And, the displacement of the body of
the accelerometer, I’m going to denote by
the symbol xb. And, so the acceleration of
the body is equal to xb double dot and I can
write a relationship between xm, xb and x.
The spring force acting on the proof mass,
I’m going to call fs, and the gravity force
acting on the proof mass is the mass multiplied
by gravitational acceleration g. I can write
Newton’s second law which relates the acceleration
of the mass to the two forces acting on at the spring force upwards and gravity acting downwards.
And, for a spring, we know that the force is
proportional to the extension of the spring,
and we can imagine that as x increases, I’m
extending the spring and it is pulling upwards
with a greater and greater force. Now, we
can combine these equations and do a little
bit of rearrangement and simplification. And
now, I’m able to write an expression that
relates the extension of the spring, x, to
the acceleration of the body, a, and the gravitational
acceleration, g. It’s really important to
note that it cannot tell the difference between
acceleration of the body, a, or gravitational
acceleration, g, and this is something we’ll
return to in just a moment.
Every accelerometer has a sensitive direction
and, typically, that’s marked on the body
of the accelerometer package. Now, in this
particular example, the accelerometer measures
acceleration in the vertical direction, but
it is insensitive to acceleration in the horizontal
direction or in the direction out of the screen.
If I place an accelerometer at rest somewhere
on the surface of the Earth, the accelerometer
records an acceleration of 1g in the vertical
or upward direction and this is a little bit
unintuitive. If I drop something, it’s going
to accelerate in the downward direction that
the accelerometer measures 1g in the vertical
or upward direction. And, this is a consequence
of Einstein’s Equivalence Principle.
And, these two examples are exactly the same
as far as an accelerometer is concerned. The
accelerometer is sitting on the surface of
planet Earth, or if it is sitting in a rocket
which is accelerating upwards at 1g. In both
these cases, the accelerometer will register
an acceleration of 1g in the vertical direction.
Gravitational acceleration varies across the
surface of the Earth. The Earth is not a perfect
sphere. It’s slightly squashed, so the diameter
at the equator is greater than the diameter
measured through the poles. Because of this,
somebody who is standing at the equator is
further away from the center of the Earth.
So, therefore, they experience a lower gravitational
acceleration. So, we can see quite clearly
in this figure here, the gravitational acceleration
in the equatorial band is significantly lower
than gravitational acceleration in the temperate
and Polar Regions of the Earth.
The standard gravity value is taken as 9.80665
meters per second squared, but note the significant
variation depending on where you are. The
low cost accelerometers that you have in your
phone and perhaps in the navigation system
in your car are based on micro-electromechanical
system technology and the whole device is
etched out of silicon. The inertial mass or
proof mass is supported by flexible spring
legs. In the case of horizontal acceleration,
the inertial mass will move sideways. And,
the change in position is measured capacititively
using these sensors here. It’s really useful
to be able to measure acceleration in three
orthogonal directions aligned with the x,
y and z-axis of a right-handed coordinate
frame. Today, you can buy tri-axial accelerometers
as a single chip. It contains three MEMS accelerometer
sensors, electronics, analog to digital converters,
filters and a serial IO capability so that
you can very easily connect it to a microcontroller.
You may not be aware that you have accelerometers
in your head. In the inner ear assembly in
each of our ears, there are a pair of accelerometers.
And, the physical principles underlying these
biological accelerometers are just the same
as those we’ve already been talking about.
The proof mass is a bunch of calcium carbonate
crystals and they are referred to as otoliths,
which means literally ear stones. They are
sitting on a gelatinous membrane which serves
as the spring. And, embedded in that gelatinous
membrane are a bunch of hair cells and they
measure the displacement of the otoliths with
respect to the inner ear. We have two of these
accelerometers in each ear, one is called
the utricle and one is called the saccule.
And, they are oriented almost orthogonally,
so one senses the acceleration in the horizontal
direction, and one senses the acceleration
in the vertical direction.
As you change the orientation of your head,
the acceleration signals from the utricle
and the saccule vary and allows your brain
to determine something about the orientation
of your head with respect to the world coordinate
frame.